Livermorium (Lv)
Chemical properties of Livermorium - Heath effects of Livermorium - Environmental effects of Livermorium
Atomic number

116

Atomic mass

unknown

Electronegativity acoording to Pauling

unknown

Density

unknown

Melting point

unknown

Boiling point

unknown

Vanderwaals radius

unknown

Ionic radius

unknown

Isotopes

unknown

Discovered

The Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

Livermorium - Lv

Livermorium

Livermorium is the temporary name of an unconfirmed chemical element in the periodic table that has the temporary symbol Lv and has the atomic number 116.

In 1999, researchers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory announced the discovery of elements 116 and 118, in a paper published in Physical Review Letters. The following year, they published a retraction after other researchers were unable to duplicate the results. In June 2002, the director of the lab announced that the original claim of the discovery of these two elements had been based on data fabricated by the principal author Victor Ninov.

The name Livermorium is used as a placeholder, such as in scientific articles about the search for Element 116; it is a Latinate way of saying "one-one-six-ium" ("ium" being a standard ending for element names). Such transuranic elements are always artificially produced, and usually end up being named for a scientist.

Due to its position in the periodic table it is expected to have properties similar to those of polonium and tellurium.

Applications
Livermorium does not have any known application and little is known about it.

Livermorium in the environment

Livermorium does not occur naturally on the earth, it is entirely synthesized in laboratories

Health effects of Livermorium
As it is so unstable, any amount formed would decompose to other elements so quickly that there’s no reason to study its effects on human health.

Environmental effects of Livermorium

Due to its extremely short half-life, there’s no reason for considering the effects of Livermorium in the environment.



Read more: https://www.lenntech.com/periodic/elements/uuh.htm#ixzz64loVnk4K